
           How to Build a A full blown software sampler for free??!!
                               Bank of SoundFonts
                       Build you Own Custom Virtual Synth

                            by Rich the TweakMeister

   From: http://www.tweakheadz.com/SoundFont_Secrets.html

   Building a good SoundFont is the same process as building a sample based
   synthesizer from scratch. You can use any sample and tweak it with a wide
   range of envelopes, filter and resonance settings and effects just like
   you can on a standard analog style synth.  If you always wanted to build
   your own synth from scratch, the SoundFont protocol allows you do do this
   entirely in the virtual domain. And it's cheap!  No hardware is needed
   other than the SF2 compatible sound card and any decent midi keyboard to
   trigger the sounds.  The results are as good as the care you put into the
   process.  If you really work the format, and are savvy with plugin FX,
   digital audio sequencers and wave editors, your results will be on
   par--and may even exceed--those developing sounds on professional
   samplers. You do have to know what you are doing, or have a relentless
   drive to experiment. Then there is a matter of taste.  It isn't going to
   happen on a weekend. But if you are like me, an incurable tweakhead,
   searching for beauty and art through sound, there are few things as
   satisfying as a well made soundfont collection.   Join the discussion on
   making SoundFonts

   What you need to get started:

     * A soundcard that plays soundfonts.  The best choices here are the
       sblive soundcards (any) and the Emu APS
     * Vienna 2.3  (Free on the Creative Labs site)
     * A decent Sample Editor  (I use Sound Forge 4.5, but anything that has
       looping tools will be fine)
     * A MIDI keyboard with velocity and aftertouch.  (Aftertouch is
       important).

   Step One:

   Make your .WAV files.

   The quality of your .WAV files are the building blocks of your SoundFont.
   Record them as cleanly as possible.  Record as hot as you possibly can
   without distortion, and delete anything that has burst through the roof.
   These should be in standard .WAV format.  Be careful to name them with
   names you will remember.  Its also helpful during the programming process
   if you put a code in the name to help you find it in the sample list when
   making instruments.  Codes are just simple abbreviations, and you can use
   whatever you want, but they should be short.  For example, your drums
   sounds could be named

   drm:kik1
   cym:HHC1
   cym:HHC2
   drm:snr1
   syn:Juno1C2
   syn:Juno1C4

   When you open the list you will see the samples in alphabetical order.
   You will save minutes with each instrument you make scrolling through the
   sample list.  If you are planning a SoundFont of 256 instruments and 256
   presets, this will translate into many hours saved.

   Make sure all your wave files have their gain optimized.  I recommend
   using a compression plugin or utility to give all samples a uniform
   character.  They should not have any 'overs' or clipping, as you will hear
   these artifacts in any instrument you use it in, but you should get as
   close as you can to maximize gain.  Some may disagree with this as the
   cumulative effect of combining hot samples can easily overload the output
   of the onboard synth. However, I feel you can adjust the level of the
   sample later as you build instruments and presets, and as long as you do
   this you can avoid clipping the output and get the best signal to noise
   ratio.

   Tuning is probably the biggest problem with SoundFonts.  Get it right at
   the sample level.  Otherwise you will be retuning all your instruments
   that use the ill-tuned sample.  While the SF2 format allows for micro
   adjustments to tuning you will get pissed when you find you always have to
   retune a certain sample 15-30 times at the instrument level because you
   neglected to do it at the beginning.  Always keep a synth fired up as
   reference for tuning.  A typical piano patch works well.

   Loop nearly all your samples.  Even select drums.  You can use these as
   great effects later on in the building of great presets.  The SF2 format
   allows you to turn off loops at other levels of the programs.  You can
   often save time by having a looping session and do them all at once.  See
   my looping tips.

   Finally IMPORT all your samples within Vienna.  You can import more than
   one sample at a time. If you put all your samples in one directory
   (recommended) when the import window opens to browse your hard drive you
   can rubberband about twenty samples and import them all at once. Over 20
   doesn't seem to work.

   Step 2:

   Make Instruments

   Go to the menu and select "new instrument".  Give it a unique name.  The
   "New Zone: box will open and you can select any sample you want.  You can
   select more than one sample as long as they are next to each other in the
   list.  See?  Aren't you glad you followed my advice in Step One?  All you
   synths are together, all your drums are together, making selection very
   easy.

   Now you have to edit the characteristics of each zone.  That is, set the
   Range and Root Key.  That's really pretty easy if you use the right click
   context menus and the mouse to do these.  Its as easy as any sampler I've
   worked with and you can see the results on the big screen.

   Tip:  Make sure you have enough samples to cover the entire keyboard.
   Perhaps the only troublesome part of the sf2 format is that samples do not
   stretch as far as they do on a professional sampler.  For example, if your
   sample has a root note of C3, and you try to stretch it to cover the
   keyboard, you will find that the sample will detune at and play the same
   out of tune pitch at about A6 and higher. The trick, of course, is to have
   a C5 version of the same sample, which will make it to the end of an 88
   key keyboard.  However, and here's a point most inexperienced Fontists
   miss, if you end up transposing and instrument down in the preset level,
   you may still run out of sample on the high end even though it plays
   perfect at the instrument level.  Rule of thumb, always give yourself an
   extra octave of playable notes than you need.  Some might say an octave
   and a fifth. Of course for high quality instrument emulations, you may
   need a sample every 4-12 notes, depending on the instrument you are
   emulating.

   Once you have your samples mapped and tuned properly, its time to use the
   onboard synth to program them.  Vienna appears to give you a choice of
   programming them at the preset level as well, but in actual practice, many
   of the synth parameters do not function at that level.  They do function
   at the instrument level, and its here that you should program your sound.

   First create and program a Global Zone for the instrument.  Right click
   the instrument and choose global zone.  These are default values for all
   the sample zones for filter, resonance, envelopes, LFOs, etc.  You can
   change them for each individual zone if you want later.  Many times
   however, defining just the global zone may be enough, and you can always
   delete it later if you end up tweaking all the parameters of each
   individual zone.

   At this point you should really begin to appreciate the tremendous
   flexibility of the SF2 format.  You can stack up zones within and
   instrument as deep as you want.  However, I recommend, unless you really
   know what you want, to save that for the preset building stage where you
   can stack instruments up.  It is best to put 1-3 layers of zones in an
   instrument.  The fewer layers of zones, the more potential use you will
   get out of the instrument at the preset stage.  Also, do not set the FX at
   the instrument level.  This is better done at the preset level too.  Of
   course, there are exceptions.  If you want Zone 1 and 2 to have a chorus
   and  zone 3 to have chorus and reverb, then yes, you could define it
   here.  But overall, its better to consider the instruments as your raw
   building blocks for the presets.

   Step 3:

   Making Presets

   You build presets using the same methods as building instruments.  Except
   this time you are shooting for the finished, polished sound.  If you have
   200 instruments in your SoundFont made, you probably have enough to make
   well over 600 unique sounding presets.  .  First set the global zone.
   Here you can set your FX send levels for the preset.  Then you can click
   each instrument with the preset and set the 'Initial Attenuation"
   parameter.  This basically allows you to mix the volumes of the different
   sounds in a tasteful way.  Parameters that I advise tweaking.  You can
   also set Coarse Tuning and Fine tuning to taste.  I advise not programming
   filter cutoff or resonance at this level as the results are not always
   predictable--this is better done when programming the instrument.  Though
   sometimes you can get the effect you want playing with them.  You will
   find that the parameters work by multiplying the value that is defined in
   the instrument.  Oddly Vienna may give you 127 steps for this and it may
   create errors.  For example, if the filter is set to 1.0 (khz) and you
   multiply that by 127, you will have an unusable result.  Enter sample
   values with the keyboard like 1.1, .9, .85, 1.15 and you will get useful
   results for most of the parameters.

   Organize your presets in a way that makes sense.  Generally, the way most
   synth manufacturers organize their presets is as follows:

     * Pianos and Keys
     * Chimes and Bells
     * Organs
     * Guitars
     * Basses
     * Strings
     * Brass
     * Winds
     * Pads
     * Leads
     * FX
     * Drums

   Of course its your bank, do what you want.  Personally, I like putting all
   my drums first, then Basses, then keys.  Be creative.

   To reorder presets you can use the SoundFont Bank Utility by Emu.  This
   used to be  available at their website.  Haven't seen it lately though.
   Its tricky to work with and the docs are sparse, but I can't go into that
   here.

   I don't have time to get into the tricks to making a good drum kit here
   (perhaps that will come), but I will say that the kits one makes in a
   SoundFont can be as interesting and as good sounding as those one can make
   in a professional sampler.  There is no limit to the number of zones you
   can have in the drum preset, so you can assign 1,2 3 or more zones per
   key--each with their own filter setting if you want.  OK one more tip:
   You can layer your kits which are defined at the instrument level when you
   make a preset.  That is you can have two contrasting kits playing on top
   of one another.  Pan them L/R.  Or Use the same kit and detune by a
   fifth.  Or a second.  Its absolutely mindblowing, even for a
   TweakMeister!

   The Secrets

   The building of a quality SoundFont takes a long time, just as building a
   synth from scratch takes a long time.  The process is the same.  The
   building of the Ice Kold Tekno Orkestra took many many months working with
   little sleep.  However, the end product is so rewarding you will find
   yourself using your font in many of your productions.  Its truly a
   creative art.  You will also find after jumping through these hoops making
   your own that you can do better than most of the soundfonts out there.
   You might even find it hard to go back to your hardware sampler after
   discovering the joys of manipulating sounds on the big screen.  I know
   some pros that scoff at the SoundFont process, but don't let that sink
   in.  The sound quality of well made SF2 files is just as good as any 16
   bit sampler, The soundcard itself may add a very thin veil of distortion,
   but it is so small it will not be evident on boards that most home studio
   folks can afford.  If you use a digital out on your soundcard, the playing
   field with professional 16 bit samplers is almost level.  5 years ago you
   would have to pay 10's of thousands to get the flexibility you have with a
   cheap soundcard.  That's the secret the pros won't tell you.  With a
   little creativeness, you can make the same incredible sounds they do.
   Experimentation has never been easier.  The layering, mixing,
   timestretching, panning, morphing, vectoring capabilities are easily had
   by anyone who works with the SF2 format. Add some cool plugins and
   resample in a digital audio sequencer and you are actually far beyond what
   a stand alone hardware sampler can do!  A final tip:  its not going to be
   long before excellent conversion tools will be in place to import
   soundfonts into samplers.  The Tweak is about to beta test one.  This will
   clearly raise the bar in commercially available soundfonts. It could
   easily become the de facto standard that links all samplers together in a
   consistent format.  As time goes on, we will see the hardware sampler as
   an extension of the SoundFont protocol, much the way laptop computers dock
   to their desktop hosts.  Within a year or two, this will be reality. Why?
   you ask?  Its just easier to work this way!



   Best of Luck in your Fontmanship!

   Rich the Tweakmeister

   You can check out and order the Tweakmeister's own custom synth, the Ice
   Kold Tekno Orkestra, available for purchase on this website.

   Copyright (c)2006 TweakHeadz.com
